# Data Lake Spark Processing
## Introduction
A music streaming startup has grown their user base and song database, they want to query and gain insight from their data. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app. The project will involve building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables.
## Purpose
The project will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.
## Dataset
The data is queried from s3 buckets hosten at AWS

```bash
Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
```
### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```bash
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```bash
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```bash
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

## Schema Design and ETL Pipeline
The schema design is a star schema with facts and dimension table.
Star scheme enables the company query song & user data with faster reads and less complex SQL query. 

The fact table contains quantitative measure containing measurements, metrics and facts of the data while dimension table contains descriptive attributes to be used as query constraining.
Fact Table: songplays
Dimension Tables: users, songs, artists and time.
